In signature verification systems, forgeries may be classified in two classes: Casual, skilled or traced. Casual forgeries are produced by only knowing the name of the person, whose signature is being forged, with no previous knowledge of the appearance of the genuine signature. Casual forgeries are the most commonly found forgeries. In skilled forgeries the forger knows the signature very well and has practiced the simulation process. Therefore the skilled forgery is very similar to the genuine signature.
In this project we consider the verification of both Kannada and English offline signatures. For the Kannada signatures there was no specific database, so we had to take the signatures by our own manually from 19 persons. For the English signatures, we use an already created database, therefore there was no need for us to create the database manually.
We approach the problem in two steps. Initially a set 20 of signatures are obtained from the subject and fed to the system. We have chosen 19 subjects for the formation of our database. Each of the subjects has provided 20 sample signatures in Kannada language. A standard database containing 20 signatures per person for 55 persons is used for verifying English signatures. 20 forgeries of the signatures of each person are collected in both the language.  These signatures are pre-processed, and the Gaussian Grid Feature Extraction technique is used for extracting the various features of the signatures. A contour representation of the image is first developed and on this representation the Gaussian Grid Feature Extraction technique is applied. 
First, the contour of the image is divided into m x n zones. Then each of the blocks are traced in all the eight directions, the 4-direction chain code histogram is generated. Every step from a pixel to its adjacent four direction (Horizantal, Vertical, Left-Diagonal and Right-Diagonal) are counted and four matrices H, V, L and R are created. Each of these matrices is of dimension m x n respectively. Over these four matrices obtained, a Gaussian smoothing filter is applied. Then the values in each of the matrices are adjusted by dividing its value by the maximum of each of the four matrices. From these four matrices two more matrices called addmod and mulmod are obtained. Finally, the feature vector is formed by combining all the six matrices Horizontal, Vertical, Left Diagonal, Right Diagonal, addmod and mulmod.
After creating a feature matrix for all the signatures of all the persons, the next step is to train the signatures of each persons and then testing the signatures to find whether they are genuine or forged, and finally to find the False Acceptance Ratio(FAR), False Rejection Ratio(FRR), True Acceptance Ratio(TRR) and True Acceptance Ratio(TAR).
Two different approaches are used for training and testing of signatures. One is the use of Support Vector Machines (SVM). 
Support Vector Machine is a classification tool. It takes a set of input data and predicts, for each given input, which of two possible classes forms the input. Given a set of training examples, each marked as belonging to one of two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a model that assigns new examples into one category or the other. An SVM model is a representation of the examples as points in space, mapped so that the examples of the separate categories are divided by a clear gap that is as wide as possible. New examples are then mapped into that same space and predicted to belong to a category based on which side of the gap they fall on.
The other approach for training and testing of the signatures is the use of Multi Layer Perceptrons (MLP). 
A Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) is an artificial neural network model that maps sets of input data onto a set of appropriate output. An MLP consists of multiple layers of nodes in a directed graph, with each layer fully connected to the next one.
An artificial neural network or simply neural network is a mathematical model or computational model that is inspired by the structure and/or functional aspects of biological neural networks. A neural network consists of an interconnected group of artificial neurons, and it processes information using a connectionist approach to computation.
In our project we make use of both SVM and MLP for training and testing.
In SVM approach, for training, a training matrix is formed by using the feature matrix. For every person, ten of his genuine signatures and ten of his forgeries are taken for training. And then for testing, the remaining signatures of each person are taken. The tested signatures belong to either one of the two groups- a genuine or a forgery, as trained in the training phase. A count is kept as to which signatures are accepted or rejected. Based on these count values, the values of FAR, FRR, TAR and TRR are calculated.
In the MLP approach, the training matrix is also constructed using the feature matrix. Each row of the feature matrix is put into a cell of the training matrix, and each row of the training matrix represents the training signatures of an individual, and there are as many rows as twice the number of individuals, one for the genuine and the other for forgeries. The parameters such as the number of epochs, the minimum gradient and type of function are set and then the trained matrix is trained. For testing, an array similar to that of each row of the training matrix is used for each signature that is to be tested. Similar to that of SVM, a count is kept as to which signatures are accepted or rejected. Based on these count values, the values of FAR, FRR, TAR and TRR are calculated. 


More information on the project along with the results is in the final_report.docx file
